Content Update 3.8.0 -- Path of Exile: Blight

Table of Contents
The Blight Challenge League
Major New Content and Features
Minor New Content and Features
Atlas Mission Changes
Legion Mechanics Added to the Core Game
Changes to Legion Mechanics
Summoner Rebalance
Mine Rebalance
Mana Rebalance
Character Balance
Skill Reworks
Skill Balance
Specific Skills
Vaal Skill Balance
Support Gem Reworks
Support Gem Balance
Passive Tree Balance
Ascendancy Balance
Item Balance
Unique Item Balance
Crafting Changes
World Changes
Monster Changes
Incursion Changes
Betrayal Changes
Azurite Mine and Sulphite Changes
Prophecy Changes
Map Changes
Zana League Mods Available During 3.8.0
User Interface Improvements
Quest Rewards
PvP Changes
Bug Fixes
The Blight Challenge League
Challenge leagues are a great opportunity for a fresh start in a new economy. All of your old characters and items are still present in the Standard and Hardcore leagues, but you're encouraged to join the new leagues, complete challenges and demonstrate your mastery of Path of Exile!
In the Blight League, strange fungal growths have begun appearing across Wraeclast, infecting those who come in contact with them, and wresting control of their minds. Sister Cassia, a new NPC, is trying to put a stop to this spreading infection, but she needs your help.
Cassia can build towers that spit flames, call down lightning strikes, chill enemies to the bone, and more, at your discretion. You'll need these powerful towers to push back the waves of mind-controlled monsters that lurch towards the fungal core. Successfully hold back the monsters, and you'll be rewarded with a wealth of items.
Among the loot dropped by the Blight, you'll find Oils, a new type of item. With two Oils, Cassia can Anoint rings with powerful tower-boosting effects. With three, she can Anoint your amulet with one of the Notable Passives from the Passive Skill Tree, opening up incredibly powerful new build possibilities!
Later on, you may discover Blighted Maps -- Maps so deeply infected by the Blight that all the ordinary monsters have fallen under its sway. These endgame Blight encounters will put your tactical tower-building skills to the test.
With 3.8.0, there are Standard, Hardcore and Solo Self-Found variations of the Blight challenge league available. They have the same core mechanics and items. You can create private league versions of these leagues, with mods that make the game harder.
The new challenge leagues include a set of 40 new challenges. When you complete 12 challenges, you will receive the Blight Helmet. When you reach 24 challenges, you will receive the Blight Portal effect. At 36 challenge completed you'll receive the Blight Wings. These microtransactions are only obtainable in this league.
From the 19th challenge onwards and for every third challenge after that, you will receive pieces of the Blight Totem Pole decoration to display in your hideout. The Totem Pole permanently showcases how many of the Blight challenges you completed during the league.

Return to top
Major New Content and Features
Added a new Dexterity Skill Gem - Plague Bearer: Gain a buff that stores the damage of Poisons you apply. Using the skill again unleashes the stored damage, dealing chaos damage over time in an area around you. Your damage modifiers don't apply to this chaos damage over time.
Added a new Dexterity/Intelligence Skill Gem - Withering Step: Gain Phasing and Elusive, a buff that gives you a decaying movement speed bonus (replacing any other instances of Elusive on you), while applying Wither to nearby enemies when you move within range. Performing any skill removes Phasing and Elusive. Shares a cooldown with other Blink skills.
Added a new Dexterity/Intelligence Skill Gem - Cobra Lash: Hurl a poisonous projectile that chains between enemies. Requires a dagger or claw.
Added a new Dexterity/Intelligence Skill Gem - Pestilent Strike: Strike an enemy, poisoning them and applying a short duration debuff. If the target dies while they have the debuff, the total remaining poison damage is spread to targets in an area around the slain enemy, dealing damage over a short time. Requires a dagger or claw.
Added a new Dexterity/Intelligence Skill Gem - Venom Gyre: Hurl a poisonous projectile that will return to you. Catch and store projectiles that return to you, up to a limit. When you use Whirling Blades, release any stored projectiles. Projectiles released by Whirling Blades are fired in a spiral and can't return. Requires a dagger or claw.
Added a new Intelligence Skill Gem - Summon Carrion Golem: Summon a Carrion Golem that adds physical damage to your non-golem minions while active. The golem uses a series of slashes that increase in damage, and can conjure up a cascade of bone spikes. The Carrion Golem deals more damage for each of your non-golem minions near it.
Added a new Intelligence/Dexterity Skill Gem - Stormblast Mine: Has an aura while placed which causes nearby enemies to take increased damage, stacking up to a maximum of 150% increased damage taken. Deals lightning damage in an area when detonated.
Added a new Intelligence/Dexterity Skill Gem - Summon Skitterbots: Summons two constructs that will detonate and trigger your traps and mines, as well as providing bonus trap and mine damage. One has an aura that shocks nearby enemies, while the other has an aura that chills nearby enemies.
Added a new Dexterity/Intelligence Support Gem - Swift Assembly Support: Gives supported trap and mine skills three separate chances to throw additional traps or mines, for a maximum of up to six additional traps or mines thrown.
Added a new Dexterity/Intelligence Support Gem - Nightblade Support: Causes supported attack skills to grant Elusive on critical strike, and causes those skills to deal more critical strike damage, and deal critical strikes more frequently, while you have Elusive. Only usable with claws and daggers.
Added a new Intelligence Support Gem - Meat Shield Support: Causes minions from supported skills to have a chance to taunt on hit, take less damage, and act more defensively. Minions from supported skills will also deal more damage to enemies that are near you.
Added a new Intelligence Support Gem - Deathmark Support: Grants the Deathmark skill, which causes any minions from supported skills to focus their attention on the deathmarked enemy. Minions from supported skills also deal more damage, and even more damage to the deathmarked enemy.
Added a new Intelligence Support Gem - Feeding Frenzy Support: Minions from supported skills act more aggressively and have a chance to grant the Feeding Frenzy buff to you on hit. While you have this buff, all your minions deal more damage and have increased attack, cast and movement speed.
Added a new Intelligence/Strength Support Gem - Infernal Legion Support: Minions from supported skills deal fire damage over time in an area around them and take fire damage based on their maximum life.
Added a new Intelligence/Dexterity Support Gem - High-Impact Mine Support: Can only support spells, or attacks that use a bow or wand. Instead of using the supported skills, you will throw a mine that uses that skill when detonated. Mines cannot use Channelling skills. Thrown mines have a stacking aura that causes nearby enemies to have a chance to take double damage with hits.
Added a new Intelligence/Dexterity Support Gem - Charged Mines: Supported skills which throw mines have increased mine throwing speed per frenzy charge and increased critical strike chance per power charge. Supported skills also grant a chance to gain a frenzy or power charge when it is detonated while targeting an enemy.
Added 16 new Unique Items.
Added 19 new Divination Cards, designed by our Supporters.
Added a new Wand base type for high-level Summoner characters, available in the Atlas.
Added two new Ring base types, available in the Atlas.
Added a new item type, Oils, which can be used to enhance your Rings and Amulet.
Significantly rebalanced and reworked Mines, the Summoner character archetype, and the Poison Assassin character archetype.
Improved the Atlas Mission system (see below).

Return to top
Minor New Content and Features
Added a second set of keybinds, accessed by holding Ctrl (by default, though this can be changed in the settings).
Updated the art of all flask basetypes. No art is reused for different flask tiers anymore! Existing flasks will retain the old art for now.
Added new mods that can appear on flasks, including some that appear specifically on Mana flasks.
Added more audio cues for various events, including (but not limited to) confirming or cancelling a trade, failing to identify an item due to a lack of scrolls, and fully clearing the Fetid Pools.
Added more Labyrinth enchantments for new skills, as well as on boots.
Added two new Grandmasters to the pool of Grandmasters.
Shield Charge now uses your equipped shield, including any cosmetics applied to it, for its effect, with the exception of the "Focus" shields (pure Intelligence base types).
You can now use up to two Helmet Attachment cosmetic effects at once.
The visual effect of Shatter now scales better based on the size of the shattered enemy.
Improved the voice and sound transitions between creating a new character and logging out to the menu or character selection.
Continued to incrementally improve the sound, art, effects and environments.

Return to top
Atlas Mission Changes
The way daily Atlas Missions are handled has been reworked.
Once you have unlocked the Atlas, you will now earn one Atlas Missions for each Master per day. These are not assigned to a specific map, but are assigned to a specific map tier-colour (white, yellow or red). You must log into your account to receive these missions.
These missions are accumulated and tracked on the right side of the Atlas panel.
More Missions can be earned by completing maps. Each time you complete a map (typically by killing the map boss), you'll have a chance to earn an Atlas Mission. The chance to earn Missions this way has been significantly raised.
You'll encounter random Masters in maps less frequently, with this chance moved to the map-completion mechanic.
To use accumulated Atlas Missions, simply talk to the associated Master in your Hideout, select the Atlas Mission option, and place the map you wish to do the mission on in the Map Device screen that opens up. You can add a Zana map modifier from this screen if you wish.
There's no limit to the number of Atlas Missions that can accumulate, so there's no pressure to run the missions as you get them. Run them at your own pace!
Your Atlas Missions are now tracked on the quest tracker as soon as you enter the map.

Return to top
Legion Mechanics Added to the Core Game
With the Legion league being so well-received, we've added Legion to the core game. You can now encounter Legion in the following ways: 

As a new possible Incursion room, with each tier increasing the potential value of the Legion encounter in the eventual Temple of Atzoatl.
As a rare Delve encounter.
As a random encounter within the Atlas (10% chance in each Map).
In addition to the above ways of encountering Legion monoliths, you can now find Legion uniques in chests that award league-restricted items.
Vagan now awards various Legion-related items in Betrayal Safehouses. In Transportation Safehouses he awards Legion Splinters. In Research he awards Incubators. In Intervention he awards Legion Scarabs. In Fortification he awards a set of chests that can be found in Legion encounters.
Unique items that can be found exclusively from Legion encounters as of 3.7.0 can still only be found from Legion encounters and the related reward sources above.

Return to top
Changes to Legion Mechanics
We've made the following balance changes to accomodate Legion in the core game: 

Item rewards within the Domain of Timeless Conflict now diminish over time. Experience does not change.
Item reward variance from Domain of Timeless Conflict encounters of differing numbers of Emblems has been flattened. You'll now receive approximately the same quantity of items per Emblem used in 2-Emblem encounters as in 5-Emblem encounters.
Time-frozen Legion monsters who are afflicted by a proliferating Ignite, and similar lingering effects, will no longer remove that Ignite upon being broken out.
A wider variety of rewards can now be found in some Incubators.

Return to top
Summoner Rebalance
We've done a sweeping balance pass of everything related to traditional summoner gameplay, and in most cases, provided substantial buffs or added new features to help summoners keep up with other playstyles. While many of these changes touch upon specific items or skills, there were a few broad changes.
Many sources of additional maximum minions have been moved to the skill gem, making summoners less reliant on specific unique items. Most minion gems now grant additional minions as the gem levels up.
All minions have received substantial increases to their base accuracy, and are much more likely to hit monsters.
We've added and improved many minion passive skills on the passive skill tree.
We've also added many new skills to help summoners control and manage their minion army (see above!).
There have been many, many more changes to unique and rare items, essences, skills and supports with summoners in mind. You'll find those changes outlined in their various sections below.

Return to top
Mine Rebalance
In this patch, we've reworked Mines from the ground-up (pun only slightly intended). The goal of this rework was to make them feel less clunky to use while still keeping them mechanically distinct from Traps.
Mines are now thrown, rather than placed. Modifiers that previously affected your mine placement speed now instead affect your mine throwing speed.
The first mine you detonate will detonate instantly.
When detonating multiple mines, they are detonated in an accelerating sequence based on distance from your initial detonation target.
All mine skills, except those supported by Blastchain Mine Support, now have an aura component that is active while they are placed but not detonated. These auras can stack (up to a limit), and are affected by aura modifiers.
Each mine you throw now reserves a flat amount of mana based on the cost of the skill (and therefore affected by Support gems).
Fire Nova Mine, Freeze Mine, Remote Mine Support and Minefield Support have all been significantly reworked. Their changes are outlined in the Skill Gem Reworks and Support Gem Reworks sections.
We've added and rebalanced sections of the passive skill tree to support the new Mine gameplay.

Return to top
Mana Rebalance
We have taken a broad look at the state of Mana in Path of Exile, and rebalanced a lot of elements, with the goal of closing the gap between characters with a little investment in Mana and characters that are almost singularly invested in Mana.
We've also removed (from temporary leagues, at least) the last vestiges of Mana leech available to spellcasters. We want Mana to be the caster equivalent of Accuracy -- something for which a little investment goes a long way to solving the 'feel' of your character.
We've rebalanced Mana Flasks game-wide, provided more and greater sources of mana on many items, and rebalanced many sources of increased mana on the passive tree. Check the various sections below to see what has changed!

Return to top
Character Balance
Sources of "Non-Ailment Damage over Time Multiplier" of all damage types have been replaced by Damage over Time Multipliers that also affect damage from Ailments. This has resulted in changes to some values on items and the passive skill tree, which have been outlined in their respective sections below.
Added a new type of modifier which grants additional levels to all gems of certain types, as opposed to only gems socketed within specific items. If you have one such source (in a weapon, for example), then all gems that fit the type, regardless of where they are socketed (such as in your body armour), will benefit. These modifiers are primarily found on caster and summoner items, and several unique items (which are outlined farther down).
You can now have up to 15 mines active at once by default (from 5).
All instances of Mine Laying Speed are now Mine Throwing Speed.

Return to top
Skill Reworks
Freeze Mine (now named Icicle Mine)
Has been completely reworked, and is now a blue gem with minimum level 12.
Deals 16 to 24 Cold Damage at gem level 1, up to 514 to 771 at gem level 20.
Base mine detonation time is 0.3 seconds.
Fires 4 additional projectiles at gem level 1, up to 6 at gem level 20.
Each mine applies 10% increased Critical Strike Chance to Hits against Enemies near it, up to a maximum of 500%.
Fires an additional projectile for every 2 prior Mines in Detonation Sequence.
All existing Freeze Mine skill gems are now Icicle Mine skill gems. Be aware that existing characters which had Freeze Mine may now have certain item slots disabled as a result of the change to level and attribute requirements. This can be remedied by removing the socketed Icicle Mine gem.

Fire Nova Mine (now named Pyroclast Mine)
Has been completely reworked, and is now a blue gem with minimum level 28.
Deals 26 to 39 Fire Damage at gem level 1, up to 240 to 361 at gem level 20.
Base mine detonation time is 0.35 seconds.
Fire 2 additional projectiles at all gem levels.
Fires an additional projectile for every 2 prior Mines in Detonation Sequence.
Each mine applies 1 to 2 fire damage to hits against enemies near it, up to a maximum of 64 to 96 at gem level 1. By gem level 20, each mine applies 12 to 18 fire damage, up to a maximum of 601 to 901.
All existing Fire Nova Mine skill gems are now Pyroclast Mine skill gems. Be aware that existing characters which had Fire Nova Mine may now have certain item slots disabled as a result of the change to level and attribute requirements. This can be remedied by removing the socketed Pyroclast Mine gem.

Return to top
Skill Balance
All Aura skills you cast (Wrath, Hatred, etc) now have a base radius of 40 (from 36) to compensate for changes to Aura Radius on the Passive Skill Tree. Likewise, the radius of Flesh and Stone now has a base radius of 28 (from 24), War Banner and Dread Banner now have a radius of 46 (from 40), and all Aura gem qualities that increased the Aura's radius now increase it by twice the amount (from 2% to 4% per 1% quality).
Several Damage over Time-only skills, such as Righteous Fire, Contagion and the Death Aura from Death's Oath, can now break barrels and other objects throughout the world.

Return to top
Specific Skills
Bodyswap
No longer requires a corpse to use, but gains significant benefits if it does consume a corpse.
Base radius has been halved.
Now costs 8 mana at gem level 1 (from 7), up to 23 at gem level 20 (from 20) .
Now has a cast time of 0.7 seconds (from 0.6).
Now has a base critical strike chance of 6% (from 5%).
Now deals 3 to 5 (from 12 to 19) fire damage at gem level 1, up to 154 to 231 (from 501 to 752) at gem level 20, plus 3% of your maximum life as fire damage at all gem levels.
Now has 300% more Area of Effect if consuming a corpse.
Explosion from the corpse now deals 6% of the corpse's base maximum life (from 4%).
Now has an added damage effectiveness of 70% (from 100%).

Bone Offering
Now has a base duration of 5 seconds (from 3), with an additional 1 second per corpse consumed (from 0.5), up to a maximum of 4 corpses (from 8).
Now applies a visual effect above the player while it is active.

Chaos Golem
Cascade skill now converts 100% of Physical Damage to Chaos, and has a larger area of effect.
Sandstorm skill now deals more damage at higher levels, and benefits from modifiers to the golem's spell damage.

Clarity
Now grants you and nearby allies additional mana regeneration as the gem levels, from no change at gem level 1, up to 33 mana per second at gem level 20 (from 17.2).

Contagion
No longer gains additional radius as the gem levels (previously gained +4 radius by gem level 20).

Convocation
Now has a cooldown of 3 seconds (from 4).
Now recovers a percentage of minion maximum life, rather than a flat value, starting at 0.7% at gem level 1, up to 1.65% at gem level 20.

Cyclone 
Cyclone was the dominant skill in 3.7.0, used by far more players than any other melee skill. In this patch, we wanted to reduce some of Cyclone's enormous range, and make it feel less penalising to use a one-handed weapon with Cyclone. 

Now has a base range of 11, rather than a range based on your weapon type.
No longer gains additional radius based on Melee Range.
Now gets 8% increased Area of Effect per 1 additional Melee Range.
Now deals 5 to 8 added Attack Physical Damage at gem level 1 (from 10 to 15), up to 28 to 42 at gem level 20 (from 56 to 85).
Now adds +1 to radius per stage (rather than +1 to melee range).
You now gain 1 stage every 0.2 seconds while channelling, rather than based on your attack time.
You now lose 1 stage every 0.3 seconds while not channeling (from 0.2 seconds).

Desecrate
Now has a corpse limit of 10 (from 15)
Now has a cast time of 0.6 seconds (from 0.8)
Now has a base duration of 4 seconds (from 5).
No longer has a cooldown.

Dominating Blow
Now has a 25% chance to summon a Normal Sentinel of Dominance when you hit a unique monster (from 10%).
Summoned Sentinels can now use Crusade Slam regardless of Ascendancy. Previously, this required a specific Guardian notable.

Explosive Trap
Now deals more damage as the gem levels, from no change at gem level 1, up to 309 to 464 Physical Damage at gem level 20 (from 280 to 420).
Now gains additional radius as the gem levels, up to +6 at gem level 20 (from +4).

Fire Trap
Now deals 11 to 17 Fire Damage at gem level 1 (from 10 to 15), up to 644 to 966 at gem level 20 (from 575 to 862).
Now deals 32.5 base Fire Damage per second at gem level 1 (from 29), up to 1832.8 at gem level 20 (from 1635.4).
Now deals 4 to 5 added Fire Damage against burning enemies at gem level 1 (from 3 to 5), up to 201 to 302 at gem level 20 (from 180 to 269).
Now gains additional radius as the gem levels, up to +8 at gem level 20 (from +6).

Flame Dash
Now deals 7 to 11 Fire Damage at gem level 1 (from 6 to 9), up to 479 to 718 at gem level 20 (from 319 to 479).
Now deals 19 base Fire Damage per second at gem level 1 (from 10.9), up to 1262.7 at gem level 20 (from 599).

Flesh Offering
Now has a base duration of 5 seconds (from 3), with an additional 1 second per corpse consumed (from 0.5), up to a maximum of 4 corpses (from 8).
Now applies a visual effect above the player while it is active.

Flesh and Stone
Now has 20 gem levels (from 6).
No longer reduces all Damage from non-Blind enemies, and instead reduces Damage from Attacks from non-Blind enemies.
You now take 9% less Damage from Attacks from non-Blind enemies at gem level 1 (from 10%), up to 11% at gem level 20 (same as previous maximum gem level).
Enemies Maimed by this skill now take 13% increased Physical Damage at gem level 1 (from 14%), up to 16% at gem level 20 (same as previous maximum gem level).
Now gains more cooldown recovery speed as the gem levels up, up to 50% at gem level 20 (previously 13% at the maximum gem level).

Herald of Purity
Summoned Sentinels can now use Crusade Slam regardless of Ascendancy. Previously, this required a specific Guardian notable.

Ice Shot
Now has 2 to 3 added Attack Cold Damage at gem level 1, up to 75 to 113 at gem level 20 (previously none).

Ice Trap
The base radius has been increased at all levels, with the main circle gaining +3 radius, the medium circles gaining +2 and the small circles gaining +1.

Lightning Arrow
Now has 1 to 13 added Attack Lightning Damage at gem level 1, up to 9 to 179 at gem level 20 (previously none).
Now gains 1% chance to Shock per 1% gem quality (from 0.5% per 1% quality).

Lightning Golem
Increased the damage dealt by the lightning projectile by approximately 40% at all gem levels.
Reduced the damage of the Arc skill by approximately 20% at all gem levels.

Raise Spectre
Now sets the level of Raised Spectres, rather than limiting the level of the corpses you can raise as Spectres.
Now grants your minions 150 additional Accuracy Rating at gem level 1 (from 142), up to 1109 at gem level 20 (from 824).
No longer modifies the Life, Energy Shield or Damage of the minion.
Now allows you to raise additional Spectres as the gem levels, up to 2 maximum Raised Spectres at gem level 20 (and more at higher gem levels).

Raise Zombie
Now grants your minions more Life as the gem levels, up to 38% more at gem level 20 (previously none).
Now grants increased cooldown recovery speed for your Zombie's Slam Attack as the gem levels, up to 76% at gem level 20 (previously none).
Now allows you to raise additional Zombies as the gem levels, up to 7 maximum raised Zombies at gem level 20 (previously set to 3 at all gem levels).

Reckoning
Now deals 115% of base damage at gem level 1 (from 91%), up to 175% at gem level 20 (from 140%).
Now has 2 to 3 added Attack Physical Damage at gem level 1 (from 6 to 10), up to 56 to 85 at gem level 20 (from 169 to 254).

Righteous Fire
Now deals 35.8 base Fire Damage per second at gem level 1, up to 1541.8 at gem level 20 (previously dealt no base Fire Damage per second).
Enemies now burn for 20% of your maximum Life and Energy Shield per second as Fire Damage at all gem levels (from 40%).
Now gains 1% Burning Damage per 1% gem quality (from 1% Spell Damage per 1% gem quality).

Riposte
Now deals 160% of base damage at gem level 1 (from 135.3%), up to 230% at gem level 20 (from 186%).
Now has 2 to 3 added Attack Physical Damage at gem level 1 (from 6 to 10), up to 56 to 85 at gem level 20 (from 169 to 254).

Stone Golem
Slam attack now has a cooldown of 4 seconds (from 6), and deals approximately 33% more damage at all gem levels.

Scorching Ray
Now deals 11.7 base Fire Damage per second at gem level 1 (from 13), up to 439.4 at gem level 20 (from 488.2).

Scourge Arrow
Clarified the Piercing behaviour on the gem.

Searing Bond
Modifiers to Spell Damage now also apply to this skill's damage over time.

Smite
Now gains additional radius as the gem levels, up to +6 at gem level 20 (from +4).

Smoke Mine
Mine now lasts 8 seconds (from 16).
Now grants 20% increased movement speed at gem level 1, up to 29% by gem level 20 (from 30% at all levels).
Now has a 2.5 second cooldown, and can hold up to 3 uses.
Now gains increased cooldown recovery speed as the gem levels up, up to 57% by gem level 20.
Now gains increased area of effect as the gem levels up, up to 76% by gem level 20.
Increases and reductions to Mine Duration now also apply to the skill's movement speed buff duration.
Only one mine of this type can detonate in each detonation sequence.
Now shares a cooldown with other Blink skills.

Spectral Shield Throw
Projectiles created from the Shield's explosion now carry with them the projectile properties of the original Shield projectile's behaviour at the point of explosion. This is important for things such as Gloomfang or Point Blank, which care about chain count or the distance the projectile has travelled.

Spirit Offering
Now has a base duration of 5 seconds (from 3), with an additional 1 second per corpse consumed (from 0.5), up to a maximum of 4 corpses (from 8).
You now gain 4% Life as extra Energy Shield per corpse consumed (from 2%).
Now applies a visual effect above the player while it is active.

Split Arrow
Now deals 100% of base damage at gem level 1 (from 90%), up to 119% at gem level 20 (from 109%).
Now fires additional arrows as the gem levels up, up to 8 additional arrows at gem level 20 (from 6).

Summon Raging Spirit
Summoned minions will now target the enemy you had targeted at the point they were summoned as a priority.

Summon Skeletons
Now summons 2 Skeleton Warriors per cast (from 1).
Now summons more Skeleton Warriors per cast as the gem levels up, up to 3 at gem level 20.
Now increases your maximum Skeleton limit as the gem levels up, up to 8 by gem level 20 (from 5).

Vengeance
Now deals 170% of base damage at gem level 1 (from 135%), up to 255% at gem level 20 (from 203%).
Now has 8 to 12 added Attack Physical Damage at gem level 1 (from 25 to 37), up to 56 to 85 at gem level 20 (from 169 to 254).

Viper Strike
Now deals 90% of base damage at gem level 1 (from 80%), up to 135% at gem level 20 (from 130%).
Now uses both weapons if you attack while Dual Wielding, but has 30% less Attack Speed if Dual Wielding.
Each weapon now hits separately if Dual Wielding, dealing 20% less Damage.

Return to top
Vaal Skill Balance
Modifiers to Vaal Soul Cost now work consistently with how modifiers to Mana Cost work. Namely, they now calculate the total amount to subtract from the cost, rounded down, and then apply that reduction to the cost of the Vaal skill. Previously, it calculated the new cost of the skill, and then rounded down, resulting in instances where Vaal skills had no Soul cost.

Vaal Cyclone
Now has a base radius of 24 (from 13).
No longer gains additional radius based on Melee Range.
Now gets 8% increased Area of Effect per 1 additional Melee Range.
Now deals 5 to 8 added Attack Physical Damage at gem level 1 (from 10 to 15), up to 28 to 42 at gem level 20 (from 56 to 85).

Vaal Immortal Call
Now prevents Soul Gain while active, and cannot have its expiry rate modified.

Return to top
Support Gem Reworks
Remote Mine Support (now called Blastchain Mine Support)
Now causes supported skills to deal 35% less damage at gem level 1, up to 25% less at gem level 20.
Mines now last 5 seconds (from 16).
Supported skills have a base Mine Detonation Time of 0.25 seconds.
Supported skills now deal 5% more damage for each prior mine in Detonation Sequence.

Minefield Support
Supported skills can now have up to 4 additional Remote Mines placed at a time.
Supported Skills throw up to 4 additional Mines.
Supported skills have 65% less Mine Throwing Speed at gem level 1, up to 60% less at gem level 20.

Minion and Totem Elemental Resistance Support (now called Elemental Army Support)
No longer supports Totems.
Now has a mana multiplier of 130%.
Minions from supported skills now have +19% to all Elemental Resistances at gem level 1, up to +29% at gem level 20.
Minions from supported skills now inflict Exposure on hit, applying -10% to the Elemental Resistance matching the highest damage type taken by the enemy.
Minions from supported skills now deal 20% more Elemental Damage at gem level 1, up to 29% more at gem level 20.
Now grants additional maximum Elemental Resistances as the gem levels, up to +2% by gem level 20.
Now grants 0.1% additional maximum elemental resistances per 1% gem quality.

Reduced Mana Support (now called Inspiration Support) 
In addition to its prior mana reduction functionality:
Now gain an Inspiration Charge when you spend mana for supported skills (maximum of 5 charges).
Lose all Inspiration Charges after spending a total of 122 mana with supported skills at gem level 1, up to 800 at gem level 20
Supported skills deal 5% more Elemental Damage per Inspiration Charge at gem level 1, up to 8% at gem level 20.
Supported skills have 7% increased critical strike chance per Inspiration Charge at gem level 1, up to 10% at gem level 20.
Now grants 1% increased Inspiration Charge duration per 1% gem quality.

Return to top
Support Gem Balance
Advanced Traps Support
Now grants supported skills 50% increased cooldown recovery speed at gem level 1 (from 15%), up to 107% at gem level 20 (from 25%).

Ancestral Call Support
Supported skills now deal 19% less damage at gem level 1 (from 25%), up to no penalty at gem level 20 (from 16% less).

Charged Traps Support
Supported skills now have +15% to critical strike multiplier per Power Charge when used by traps (from +12%).
Supported skills now have 10% increased trap throwing speed per Frenzy Charge (from 6%).

Fortify Support
Supported skills now deal more damage with all Ailments caused by melee hits (whereas previously it was just Bleeding and Poison).

Cluster Traps Support
Now requires 27 Intelligence at gem level 1, up to 48 at gem level 20. This may disable items on existing characters, but removing the Cluster Traps Support gem will remedy this problem.

Mana Leech Support
Now only causes supported Attacks to leech mana.

Minion Life Support
Now has a mana multiplier of 130% (from 140%).

Minion Speed Support
Supported skills now have 25% increased minion Cast Speed at gem level 1 (from 10%), up to 34% at gem level 20 (from 19%).
Supported skills now have 25% increased minion Attack Speed at gem level 1 (from 10%), up to 34% at gem level 20 (from 19%).
Now has a mana multiplier of 130% (from 140%).

Multistrike Support
Supported skills now deal 20% less Attack Damage at gem level 1, up to 10% at gem level 20 (from 30% less at all gem levels).
First repeat of supported skills now deal 22% more Damage at all gem levels (from 40% more at gem level 1 to 50% more at gem level 20).
Second repeat of supported skills now deal 44% more damage at all gem levels (from 80% more at gem level 1 to 99% more at gem level 20).
Now has a mana multiplier of 160% (from 180%).

Poison Support
Supported skills now deal 20% more damage with Poison at gem level 1 (from no bonus), up to 39% more at gem level 20 (from 28%).

Pulverise Support
Supported skills now have 25% increased Area of Effect (rather than the multiplicative "more" Area of Effect) at gem level 1, up to 34% increased Area of Effect at gem level 20.
Supported skills deal 40% more Melee Area Damage at gem level 1 (from 30%), up to 59% at gem level 20 (from 45%).

Trap Support
Trap Throwing Speed now scales up to 19% at gem level 20 (from 10%).
Supported skills now deal increased Trap Damage as the gem levels up, up to 38% increased Trap Damage at gem level 20 (previously no bonus).

Unbound Ailments Support
Supported skills now have 35% increased duration of Ailments on enemies at gem level 1 (from 25%), up to 54% at gem level 20 (from 44%).
Supported skills now have 25% increased effect of non-damaging Ailments on enemies at gem level 1 (from 20%), up to 34% at gem level 20 (from 30%).
Supported skills now deal 25% more damage with Ailments at gem level 1 (from 20%), up to 34% at gem level 20 (from 30%).

Vicious Projectiles Support
Supported skills now deal 40% more Chaos Damage over Time at gem level 1 (from 30%), up to 59% more at gem level 20 (from 49%).
Supported skills now deal 40% more Physical Damage over Time at gem level 1 (from 30%), up to 59% more at gem level 20 (from 49%).
Supported skills now deal 40% more Physical Projectile Attack Damage at gem level 1 (from 30%), up to 59% more at gem level 20 (from 49%).

Return to top
Passive Tree Balance
As in 3.7.0, we've added a lot of new passives to the passive tree in this patch. Rather than list out what each of the dozens of new passives contains, we've listed out the cluster notable names below. Mine passives, Damage over Time passives, Mana passives and Summoner passives have also extensively changed. To examine these changes in detail, please keep an eye out in the community for passive tree tools once we give the passive tree data out. Below, we've listed changes which were not specific to the broader changes previously mentioned. 

Added the following new clusters and notables: Disciple of the Forbidden, Golem Commander, Prodigal Perfection, Mystic Bulwark, Searing Heat, Cursed Concoction, Indomitable Army, Enduring Bond, Essence Extraction, Ravenous Horde, Successive Detonations, Dire Torment, Aqueous Accelerant, Fearsome Force, Arcane Capacitor, Blast Waves, Aligned Spirits, Efficient Explosives.
Mortal Conviction now specifies that only Non-banner, Non-mine skills reserve no mana.
Perfect Agony now causes modifiers to Critical Strike Multiplier to apply to Damage over Time Multiplier for Ailments from Critical Strikes at 50% of their value, rather than 30% previously. This is now additive with other sources of Damage over Time multiplier, however.
Elemental Overload now causes Ailments to never count as being from Critical Strikes (previously caused Ailments from Critical Strikes to have no Damage Multiplier).
Master of the Arena, Brinkmanship, Bone Breaker (for Sceptres and Maces) and Smashing Strikes (for Staves) now each grant +2 to Melee Weapon and Unarmed Attack Range (previously +1).
Cleaving (for Axes), Flaying (for Daggers) and Claws of the Pride (for Claws) now each grant +1 to Melee Weapon and Unarmed Attack Range.
Leadership now grants 30% increased Aura area of effect (from 50%).
Champion of the Cause now grants 12% increased Aura area of effect (from 20%).
All small passive skills which previously granted 20% increased Aura area of effect now grant 12% increased Aura area of effect.
The Alchemist cluster near the Witch has been removed and its Flask Effect modifiers spread across the passive tree, in particular near the Ranger.
The Utmost Might cluster has been moved south, and is now next to the Bloodless cluster.
The Utmost Intellect cluster has been moved east, and is now where Arcane Expanse used to be (Arcane Expanse has moved slightly further east).
Added 13 new notables revealed only when you obtain them through Anointing an item.

Return to top
Ascendancy Balance
Ascendant
Necromancer: Now causes your offerings to have 25% reduced effect on you (from 50%). Auras from your skills now grant 2% increased attack and cast speed to you and allies (from 3%). If you've consumed a corpse recently, you and your minions now gain 30% increased area of effect. No longer grants 20% increased skill effect duration.
Saboteur: Now causes your damage to penetrate 8% of enemy elemental resistances (from 6%). You can now regenerate 1% of life per second for each mine detonated or trap triggered recently, up to 10% (from 20%).
Assassin: Now grants +0.75% to critical strike chance (from 1%). Now grants 10% chance to gain Elusive on kill. No longer grants 10% increased movement speed if you've killed recently.
Guardian: Now grants you and nearby allies Onslaught while there are at least five nearby allies. No longer grants 10% increased effect of non-curse auras from your skills.

Berserker
War Bringer: Now grants you and nearby allies 20% increased attack speed if you've warcried recently (from 10%). Now grants 15% chance to deal double damage if you've warcried in the past 8 seconds. No longer causes you and nearby allies to deal increased damage if you've warcried recently.
Flawless Savagery: Now grants 50% increased critical strike chance for attacks (from 80%), and +25% to critical strike multiplier (from +30%)
Crave the Slaughter: No longer grants 1% chance to deal double damage per 4 Rage.
Rite of Ruin: Clarified that only the inherent effects from having Rage are tripled.

Chieftain
Ramako, Sun's Light: No longer grants 15% more burning damage. Now grants +25% to Fire Damage over Time Multiplier.

Guardian
Radiant Crusade: Has been reworked. It now grants +20% to all Elemental Resistances. While there are at least five nearby allies, you and nearby allies have Onslaught. While there is at least one nearby ally, you and nearby allies deal 10% more damage.
Unwavering Crusade: Has been reworked: Now grants nearby allies 30% increased damage, 15% increased attack, cast and movement speed, 30% increased area of effect, and causes nearby allies to Intimidate and Unnerve Enemies for 4 seconds on hit. Enemies which are Unnerved take 10% increased Spell Damage.

Hierophant
Divine Guidance: No longer grants +150 to maximum Mana. Now grants 30% increased maximum Mana, and causes increases and reductions to maximum Mana to also apply to damage at 30% of their value.
Sanctuary of Thought: Now grants 50% less Mana cost of skills (rather than reduced). No longer grants 50% reduced Mana cost of skills while on full Energy Shield. Now grants 20% of maximum Mana as extra maximum Energy Shield (from 30%), and 1% increased area of effect per 50 unreserved maximum mana, up to 100%.

Raider
Small passives: Now grant 20% increased Frenzy Charge duration (from 18%) on the way to Avatar of the Slaughter, 4% increased movement speed (from 3%) on the way to Avatar of the Veil, and 15% increased Onslaught effect (previously Onslaught duration) on the way to Avatar of the Chase.
Way of the Poacher: Now grants +1 to maximum Frenzy Charges.
Avatar of the Slaughter: No longer grants +1 to maximum Frenzy Charges. Now grants 8% increased Evasion Rating per Frenzy Charge, 3% increased Movement Speed per Frenzy Charge (from 2%), and 8% increased Attack Damage per Frenzy Charge (from 3%).
Quartz Infusion: Now grants 10% chance to dodge Attack Hits (from 6%), and 40% increased Elemental Damage.
Avatar of the Veil: No longer grants 40% increased Elemental Damage. Now causes nearby enemies to have Fire, Cold and Lightning Exposure while you have Phasing, applying -15% to those resistances. Also causes nearby enemies to have 15% less Accuracy while you have Phasing.
Rapid Assault: Now grants +5% to chance to evade attacks.
Avatar of the Chase: Now grants 30% increased attack damage during Onslaught (from 20%), 30% more chance to evade melee attacks during Onslaught (from 25%) and 30% more chance to evade projectile attacks during Onslaught (from 25%).

Saboteur
Bomb Specialist: No longer allows you have up to 2 additional mines placed at a time. Now grants 4% increased area of effect for each mine, and grants your mines 20% increased detonation speed. Also grants 20% increased mine throwing speed if you detonated mines recently (was previously mine laying speed).
Demolitions Specialist: Has been completely reworked. It now grants 100% increased effect of Auras from mines, and causes mines to hinder enemies near them for 2 seconds when they land, reducing enemy movement speed by 40%.
Pyromaniac: Now causes you to regenerate 1% of Life per second for each Mine Detonated or Trap Triggered recently, up to 10% per second (from a maximum of 20%). Now grants 20% reduced mana cost of skills that throw traps (From 25%) and 20% reduced mana reservation of skills that throw mines.
Explosives Expert: No longer grants increased area damage, reduced damage taken from trap or mine hits, or elemental resistance penetration. Now grants 30% increased area of effect (from 20%), 8% reduced area damage taken from hits, +30% to critical strike multiplier against burning enemies, 80% increased critical strike chance against shocked enemies, and causes damage against chilled enemies to penetrate 10% of elemental resistances.

Trickster
Ghost Dance: Now grants +3% to chance to evade while you have Energy Shield (from +5%), 2% reduced damage taken per Ghost Shroud (from 3%), and when hit, causes you to lose a Ghost Shroud and recover Energy Shield equal to 4% of your Evasion Rating (from 5%).

Assassin
Toxic Delivery: No longer causes you to recover 0.5% of your maximum Life per poison affecting enemies you kill. Now grants you +0.4% to critical strike chance per poison affecting the enemy, up to +2%. Now causes poisons you inflict with critical strikes to deal 50% more damage (from 30%).
Noxious Strike: No longer grants +0.1% to critical strike chance per poison affecting the enemy. Now causes you to recover 0.5% of your maximum Life per poison affecting enemies you kill. Also grants +25% to Damage over Time Multiplier for poison and 50% increased Damage with poison.
Ambush and Assassinate: No longer grants 30% increased damage with hits against enemies that are on low life. Now grants 20% more damage (Multiplicative!) with hits and ailments against enemies that are on low life.
Opportunistic: No longer grants 100% increased damage while there is only one enemy nearby, nor causes you to take no extra damage from critical strikes while there is only one enemy nearby. Now grants 20% more damage (Multiplicative! Again!) while there is at most one Rare or Unique enemy nearby. Also reduces damage taken by 10% while there are at least two Rare or Unique enemies nearby.
Unstable Infusion: Now grants +1 to maximum Power Charges.
Deadly Infusion: No longer grants +1 to maximum Power Charges. Now increases movement speed by 10% while at maximum Power Charges.
Added a new notable -- Mistwalker: 50% chance to gain Elusive on critical strike. 20% increased attack and cast speed while Elusive. 8% reduced damage taken while Elusive. 25% increased Elusive effect. You take no extra damage from critical strikes while Elusive.

Slayer
Overwhelm: Base critical strike chance for attacks with weapons is now 7.5% (from 8%).
Bane of Legends: You now gain 10% increased attack speed for 20 seconds when you kill a Rare or Unique enemy (from 20%). You now gain 10% increased movement speed for 20 seconds when you kill an enemy (from 20%).

Necromancer
Commander of Darkness: The small passive leading to the notable now grants 5% increased effect of non-curse Auras from your skills. It no longer grants 4% increased cast speed.
Mistress of Sacrifice: Now causes your offerings to have 25% reduced effect on you (from 50%), and grants 30% increased Skill Duration (from 20%), and 30% increased Minion Duration. No longer grants 40% increased Damage if you have consumed a corpse recently, or 2% increased attack and cast speed for each corpse consumed recently.
Flesh Binder, Invoker, Bone Sculptor, Soul Weaver and Puppet Master have all been removed and replaced by new notables.
Added a new notable -- Essence Glutton: 20% increased maximum Mana. For each nearby corpse, you and nearby allies regenerate 0.2% of Energy Shield per second, up to 2% per second. For each nearby corpse, you and nearby allies regenerate 5 mana per second, up to 50 per second. Regenerate 8% of your Mana and Energy Shield over 2 seconds when you consume a corpse.
Added a new notable -- Mindless Aggression: Minions have 30% increased movement speed, 10% increased attack speed, 10% increased cast speed, and deal 30% increased damage.
Added a new notable -- Unnatural Strength: +2 to level of all Minion skill gems. Requires Mindless Aggression.
Added a new notable -- Bone Barrier: Grants level 20 Bone Armour skill. 1% additional Physical Damage reduction per minion, up to 10%. +3% to all elemental resistances per Minion, up to 30%. 3% increased recovery rate of Life and Energy Shield per Minion, up to 30%. Minions have 20% more maximum Life. Requires Mindless Aggression.
Added a new notable -- Plaguebringer: If you have consumed a corpse recently, you and your Minions have 30% increased Area of Effect. With at least one nearby corpse, you and nearby allies deal 10% more Damage, and nearby Enemies deal 10% reduced Damage.
Added a new notable -- Corpse Pact: 30% increased Damage if you have consumed a corpse recently. 2% increased attack and cast speed for each corpse consumed recently. Enemies near corpses you spawned recently are Chilled and Shocked. Corpses you spawn have 50% increased Maximum Life. Requires Plaguebringer.

Elementalist
Liege of the Primordial: Now causes your summoned Golems to be immune to Elemental Damage (regardless of Golem type).
Elemancer: No longer grants ailment prevention based on the types of Golems you have summoned. Now grants 35% chance to avoid Elemental ailments per summoned Golem, and also grants 25% increased effect of buffs granted by your golems per summoned Golem (stacks with Liege of the Primordials identical stat).
Beacon of Ruin: Now also grants 30% increased effect of non-damaging Ailments on enemies.

Occultist
Withering Presence: Now grants +20% to Chaos Damage over Time Multiplier (was previously Non-Ailment Chaos Damage over Time Multiplier). The small passive leading to the notable have had the same treatment.
Vile Bastion: Now also causes you to regenerate 40 Energy Shield per second.

Return to top
Item Balance
Several Daggers are now classified as Rune Daggers. Daggers can no longer roll caster-related modifiers, while Rune Daggers retain their old mod generation behaviour.
Several Staves are now classified as Warstaves. Warstaves can no longer roll caster-related modifiers, while Staves retain their old mod generation behaviour.
Sceptres are now identified as a separate class to one-handed Maces.
Elder and Shaper gloves can no longer roll the +1 Traps Thrown/+1 Mines Placed modifiers.
Weapon modifiers that add maximum Mana have had their values raised across the board. Staves, in particular, can now be found with modifiers that add large quantities of maximum Mana. Existing weapons may be updated to the new values in some cases using a Divine Orb (Staves can't).
Wands, Sceptres, Staves, Rune Daggers and pure Intelligence Shields can now roll modifiers which affect the levels of all Skill Gems of a certain type, not just those socketed within that item. They can no longer roll the modifers which solely affect socketed gem levels.
Wands, Sceptres and Staves and Jewels can now roll Fire Damage over Time Multiplier modifiers.
Non-Ailment Chaos Damage over Time Multipler is now just Chaos Damage over Time Multiplier, and can affect ailments. This affects all items with this mod.
Daggers and Rune Daggers can now roll modifiers to Chaos Damage over Time Multiplier.
Jewels can now roll Physical Damage over Time Multipler modifiers.
Belts can now roll Mana prefixes.
Paua Rings now have 20 to 30 mana on their implicit (from 20 to 25).
Items with the Matatl's prefix that grant +1 to the level of Trap skill gems now also apply to Mine skill gems. This mod can no longer appear on 1-handed weapons.
Mana flasks at all levels have been rebalanced. In general, they will recover more mana over less time than previously, and have more uses. They can also roll several useful new modifiers.
The +1 to Lightning, Fire and Cold Gems weapon vendor recipes now instead grants a weapon with added damage of that element for spells. The Chaos variant of this recipe has been removed. The values of the modifiers granted by these recipes is dependant on the rarity of the ring used. This recipe now also works for Rune Daggers.
The Labyrinth Helmet Enchantment for Desecrate which granted increased Cooldown Reduction now instead grants increased Duration at the same value. This affects existing items with this enchantment. This enchantment can no longer be obtained from the Labyrinth.
The Labyrinth Boots Enchantments which previously granted Life and Mana Leech if you have Killed Recently now instead just grant Life Leech.
The Labyrinth Boots Enchantments which previously granted Life and Mana Regeneration if you have been Hit Recently now instead just grant Life Regeneration.
The Labyrinth Helmet Enchantment for Tornado Shot which added additional secondary projectiles is now exclusively available from the Eternal Labyrinth, and now only adds one additional secondary projectile. Existing items with this enchantment are unaffected.
Added a new set of Labyrinth Boots Enchantments which grant increased Mana Regeneration Rate if you have cast a Spell Recently.
Resonators can now stack. They have a stack size of 10 in normal Stash Tabs and the inventory, and the Primitive Resonators can stack to 5000 in the Currency Tab.
The Glass Shank basetype can no longer roll caster modifiers.
A number of Accuracy modifiers for Minions have been added to the mod pool for both Abyss and ordinary Jewels.
The added Lightning Damage modifier with the prefix name "Heart-stopping" has been renamed to "Vapourising", because we added a bunch of other mods in 3.6.0, one of which was ALSO called Heartstopping, and Heartstopping fit better on the newer one. Mod names are hard.
Added a new set of modifiers for Intelligence-based armours which grant added Energy Shield and Mana.
Using a Bound Fossil to craft boots will no longer grant +1 to Maximum number of Spectres. It instead now grants +1 to level of Raise Spectre gems. This also affects existing pairs of boots with this modifier.
Essence of Zeal now grants increased Trap and Mine Throwing Speed when used on a Belt.
The Avenger's flask prefix now grants 5 charges when you take a critical strike (from 3).
The "of Craving" and "of Gluttony" modifiers can no longer appear on flasks.
The increased mana modifier available on Jewels can now roll between 8 and 10% increased mana (from 6 to 8%).
Minion Damage modifiers from all tiers of Essence of Fear have been significantly increased. Existing items can be updated to the new values with a Divine Orb.
Essences of Rage, Spite and Sorrow no longer provides additional levels to socketed gems, and instead grant Resistance Penetration of the associated element.

Return to top
Unique Item Balance
The following items now affect all Spells of certain types, rather than just those socketed in the item: Taryn's Shiver, Searing Touch, Agnerod North/East/South/West, Cane of Unravelling, Xirgil's Crank, and The Consuming Dark.
Brutal Restraint: Can no longer modify passives with "8% increased Effect of Flasks on you", instead granting "8% increased Effect of Non-Unique Flasks on you". This affects all versions of the item.
Watcher's Eye: Can no longer gain +% to Cold and Chaos Damage over Time Multipliers while affected by Malevolence. Instead now has +% to Damage over Time Multipliers while affected by Malevolence. This affected all versions of the item. The mana cost reduction while affected by Clarity now specifically applies to non-channeled skills. The mana leech while affected by Wrath is now Energy Shield leech while affected by Wrath. These two changes do NOT affect existing items, and cannot be obtained with a Divine Orb.
The Poet's Pen: Now triggers socketed spells at the end of an attack, rather than at the start. Now has a cooldown of 0.15 seconds (from 0.25).
Doomsower: No longer causes socketed Red Gems to gain 10% of Physical Damage as extra Fire Damage. Instead causes Attack Skills to gain 5% of Physical Damage as extra Fire Damage per socketed Red Gem. Also causes you to have Vaal Pact while all socketed Gems are Red. This does not affect existing versions of this item.
The Star of Wraeclast: No longer grants Illusory Warp, and instead grants Level 10 Frostblink. Now also grants 50% increased duration for Frostblink. Existing versions of this item are unaffected and cannot obtain these changes.
Ashcaller: No longer grants added Fire Damage to Attacks. Instead grants +15-25% to Fire Damage over Time Multiplier. This only affects new versions of the item. Now grants 20-30% increased Burning damage (down from 40-50%). Existing items will update to these new values if you use a Divine Orb.
Blasphemer's Grasp: No longer grants Ailment Damage per Elder Item equipped, and instead grants Ailment Damage over Time Multiplier per Elder Item equipped. This affects all versions of the item.
Cane of Unravelling: Non-Ailment Chaos Damage over Time Multiplier is now just Chaos Damage over Time Multiplier. This affects all versions of the item.
The Searing Touch: No longer grants 70% increased Burning Damage. Now grants +40-60% to Fire Damage over Time Multiplier. This does not affect existing items.
Femurs of the Saints: No longer causes your minions to Regenerate Life, nor does it grant increased Minion Attack and Cast Speed per Skeleton you Own, increased Minion Duration per Raised Zombie, or increased Minion Damage per Raised Spectre. It now causes minions to deal 60-80% increased Damage, and grants 1% chance to Block Attack Damage per Summoned Skeleton, 2% increased Attack and Cast Speed per Summoned Raging Spirit, 0.6% of Life Regenerated per second per Raised Zombie, and 30% increased Mana Regeneration Rate per Raised Spectre.
Vis Mortis: No longer grants +1 to maximum number of Raised Spectres or grants your minions Unholy Might when they kill an Enemy. Now causes minions to gain 15-20% of Elemental Damage as extra Chaos Damage.
Coated Shrapnel: No longer grants added Physical Damage for Traps and Mines. Now has a Small radius, and causes passives in radius to also grant (2-3) to (4-6) added Physical Damage for Traps and Mines.
Fortified Legion: Can no longer drop. Has been replaced by a new unique item which uses the same art.
Apparitions: Can no longer drop. Has been replaced by a new unique item which uses the same art.
Violent Dead: Can no longer drop or be obtained from quests.
Sidhebreath: No longer grants Physical Attack Damage leeched as Mana. Now causes minions to deal (5-9) to (11-15) additional Cold Damage.
Healthy Mind: Now limited to 1.
Bones of Ullr: No longer increases the maximum number of Zombies or Spectres you can have. Instead, it now grants +1 to the level of Raise Zombie and Raise Spectre gems. This affects all versions of the item.
Jaws of Agony: Now grants level 25 Bear Trap. This affects all versions of the item, however the values on existing versions will say otherwise until a Divine Orb is used.
Queen's Decree: Now causes Minions to have 30-40% increased maximum Life (from 10-15%), and deal 30-40% increased Damage (from 10-15%). Existing versions of this item can be updated with a Divine Orb.
The Queen's Hunger: No longer causes Offering skills to have 25% reduced effect on you. This affects all versions of the item.
Midnight Bargain: Now causes Minions to have 20-30% increased Movement Speed (from 10-20%), and deal 50-70% increased Damage (from 10-30%). Existing versions of this item can be updated with a Divine Orb.
Arakaali's Fang: The spiders summoned by this item now take up less space and have Phasing (and therefore will not block players or monsters as often or as easily).
Combat Focus: Now also applies to Wild Strike.
Berek's Grip: No longer grants 1% of damage leeched as Mana against frozen enemies. Instead grants Energy Shield leech against frozen enemies. This does not affect existing versions of the item.
Tempered Flesh/Transcendent Flesh: Now grants +7% to Critical Strike Multiplier per 10 unallocated Strength in radius (from +5%).
Tempered Mind/Transcendent Mind: Now grants 125 Accuracy Rating per 10 unallocated Intelligence in radius (from 100).
Dead Reckoning: Now turns 15 Skeleton Warriors into Skeleton Mages (from 5). Now limited to 1. Existing versions of this item can be updated with a Divine Orb.
From Dust: Now allows you to summon 4 additional Skeletons at a time (from 2). Existing versions of this item can be updated with a Divine Orb.
Bloodbond: The Blood Offering skill now has a base duration of 5 seconds (from 3), and gains an additional second per corpse consumed (from 0.5 seconds), with a maximum number of consumable corpses of 4 (from 8). It also now grants 10% more Life Regeneration to Minions per Corpse consumed (from 5%).
Curtain Call: Now increases Mine Detonation Speed rather than Mine Arming Speed. Now reduces Mine Throwing Speed rather than Mine Laying Speed. Now requires that you have at least 800 Intelligence or Dexterity to throw up to 1 additional Mine (from 500).
Tremor Rod: No longer causes you to deal 35% less Mine Damage. No longer grants increased Mine Laying Speed. Now grants +2 to the level of socketed Spell gems. This does not affect existing items and cannot be Divined.

Return to top
Crafting Changes
Added a new Fire Damage over Time Multiplier crafting option, which is unlocked when the Cold Damage over Time Multiplier is unlocked.
Veiled Flask modifiers now only need to be Unveiled once to be crafted.
Immortal Syndicate-member-specific recipes now require half as many Unveilings to be unlocked.
Crafted Trap and Mine Throwing Speed modifiers now grant higher values, and have separate versions for Two-Handed weapons with even higher values still.
The mana cost reduction crafted modifier (AKA "Elreon's") has been split into two separate modifiers -- one for Channeling skill mana costs, and one for non-Channeling skill mana costs. Each has three ranks.
You can no longer craft a mana cost reducing modifier onto an Incursion mana cost reduction ring.
The Hybrid Life and Mana crafted modifiers have been split into flat Life and Mana Regeneration, and flat Mana and Life Regeneration modifiers.
Re-added the flat Energy Shield crafted modifiers for Rings and Amulets that mysteriously vanished.

Return to top
World Changes
Labyrinth Traps now deal 90% less bleeding damage to Minions.

Return to top
Monster Changes
Monster accuracy rating has been reduced game-wide. Players who invest in Evasion will, as a result, be evading monsters at approximately pre-3.7.0 rates.
Normal monsters that spawn as part of a Rare monster's pack are now classified as minions of that monster, and gain one of the Rare monster's non-nemesis, non-aura modifiers. They also have a special visual effect to distinguish them, will deal more damage, have more life, and grant more experience when slain.
Piety's Fire Form now has greater attack range. Made small improvements to Piety's AI during the Lunaris Temple encounter.
Monsters which use Molten Strike now create the projectiles whether they hit a target with the main attack or not.

Return to top
Incursion Changes
Rebalanced the life regeneration Temple-wide modifier with respect to monsters of magic and rare rarity.
As mentioned above, you can now encounter Legion-themed rooms in the Temple of Atzoatl.
Reduced the life of Vaal Advocates and Enhanced Vaal Fallens by 25%
You can now find items that affect Mines from the Trap rooms of the Temple of Atzoatl.

Return to top
Betrayal Changes
The state of your Betrayal board is now shared across all characters on the same account and in the same league.
Upon completing the Mastermind encounter, you'll now have access to a reward room for every single Immortal Syndicate member currently with a job on your board (including prisoners). That's essentially up to 14 rooms worth of rewards, plus the Mastermind themselves.
Added a Stash to the Mastermind's Safehouse reward area because, well, you're going to need it.
Mastermind Intelligence no longer decays.
Upon defeating the Mastermind, the Betrayal board state is reset to a similar number of members and relationships as the starting state. However, Safehouse Intelligence is no longer reset upon defeating the Mastermind.
Safehouses now have 100% increased Experience from monsters, and the Mastermind's Safehouse now has 200% increased Experience from monsters.
You now always have the option to 'Release' Syndicate members.
Each encounter is now tracked on the Quest Tracker on the right side of the screen.
You'll now encounter far fewer 'empty' encounters based on your Betrayal board state.

Return to top
Azurite Mine and Sulphite Changes
Your Voltaxic Sulphite is now shared across all characters on the same account and in the same league. There is still a hard upper limit of 65000 Sulphite. Characters that are merged to Standard at the end of a league will bring their Sulphite with them, up to whatever your highest maximum Sulphite limit is.
The tunnel Niko digs for you based on your character level is now also shared league-wide across all your characters, meaning your highest-level character will determine the depth of Niko's tunnel for all characters. This tunnel will only ever, at most, be 6 levels behind your highest-level character until you reach level 68. Previously, it was 15 levels behind by the time you reach level 68.
The rate of level growth for monsters within the Azurite Mine is now faster, requiring significantly fewer depths to hit the maximum monster levels within the Mine. This was because most players progressed through the Atlas faster than the Mine, and the two difficulty levels would quickly become out of sync.
As a result of the change to the depth-to-level ratio, the cost of Delves in those interim levels has been increased, but tapers back to the original costs as you get deeper.
Dynamite is now Instant (ie. can be used while moving).
As mentioned above, you can now find Legion encounters and rewards in the Azurite Mine.

Return to top
Prophecy Changes
Prophecies which can create Tempests in areas can no longer trigger in the Shaper's Realm or during the most difficult version of the Elder encounter.

Return to top
Map Changes
The Atlas of Worlds has been shuffled. Most maps have changed tier and location within the Atlas.
If you're lucky, Zana will now offer 5 new unique maps as part of her missions. Each map contains a boss encounter originally from the Synthesis league, and each can drop unique items originally exclusive to that league. Note, you cannot obtain Fractured items, nor will you have any access to the Synthesiser.
You'll now appear in your Hideout (rather than Town) if you die to the Elder or one of its Guardians.
The Beast of the Pits (Barrows map boss) now moves more quickly during its charge attack, but can use the attack less frequently. Its base attack speed has been reduced, and its damage increased.
Piety boss encounters in which she transforms into her Fire Form have also benefitted from increased attack range and AI tweaks.
Breachlords now have more appropriate life values for their higher-level variants (such as those from Pure Breachstones). Chayula in particular has significantly higher life in special versions of his Breach Domain (such as the Pure version).
Breach Domains now have higher monster density, and the monsters contained within have more base life. The map modifier which granted more life to these monsters has been removed. The rate at which monsters are revealed has been sped up, and you'll have more time at the start of the encounter.
The bosses of the Lair and Dark Forest maps will now spend more time in their Human form between transformations into Wolf form.
Defeated Syndicate members, Shrines, hidden monsters such as Devourers and other things will no longer lure out Shaper phantoms.

Return to top
Zana League Mods Available During 3.8.0
Zana's map device options are now unlocked as you progress through the Atlas quest chain. These are the League Mods available during 3.8.0. 

Fortune Favours the Brave (costs 3 Chaos Orbs): One of these options will be applied at random, including those you have not yet unlocked.
Alternate of Same Tier up to Tier 10 (costs 1 Chaos Orb): Requires a Rare map. Opens a random Rare map of the same tier, excluding the map you placed in the device.
Shaped Tier 1-5 (costs 2 Chaos Orbs): Requires a Rare map. Opens a version of your map at 5 tiers higher, randomly rolled as a Rare.
Shaped Tier 1-10 (costs 6 Chaos Orbs): Requires a Rare map. Opens a version of your map at 5 tiers higher, randomly rolled as a Rare, with a chance to be Corrupted.
Elder Tier 1-15 (costs 15 Chaos Orbs): Requires a Rare map. Opens a version of your map at Tier 16, randomly rolled as a Rare, with a chance to be Corrupted.
Warbands (costs 2 Chaos Orbs): Area is inhabited by 3 additional Warbands.
Abyss (costs 2 Chaos Orbs): Area contains an additional Abyss.
Ambush (costs 3 Chaos Orbs): Area contains 3 extra Strongboxes.
Bloodlines (costs 3 Chaos Orbs): Magic monster packs each have a Bloodline mod. Area contans 3 additional magic monster packs.
Nemesis (Costs 4 Chaos Orbs): Rare monsters each have a Nemesis mod. Area contains 5 additional packs with a Rare monster.
Breach (Costs 4 Chaos Orbs): Area contains 2 additional Breaches.
Harbinger (Costs 4 Chaos Orbs): Area contains 2 extra Harbingers.

Return to top
User Interface Improvements
The "Invite to Party/Kick from Party" button in the player context menu has been moved to the top and separated from the other buttons.
Added slots for Harbinger's Orbs, Ancient Orbs, Orbs of Binding and Engineer's Orbs to the Currency Stash Tab. These slots are invisible until you add one of those currencies.
Increased the stack size for Perandus Coins in the Currency Stash Tab to 50000.
Added slots for Legion Splinters, Emblems and Scarabs to the Fragment Stash Tab.
Condensed the display of values greater than 9999 on buff icons.
Pressing the Hide Popups button in the Help Panel now also disables the flashing Help Panel icon, and marks all pages as read.
Multiple different timers can now be displayed at once, meaning you will be able to track how much time remains to complete your Incursion in a timed Zana map.
Atlas search has been improved. You can enter a value to find all maps of that tier, highlight all unique maps with "unique", and even search for Pantheon souls!
A notification now displays how much favour you've earned upon completing a Master's mission.
You can now scroll between stash tabs by holding ctrl and using the mouse wheel.
Improved the information displayed when you attempt to import a hideout but don't have all of the necessary decorations.
Added warnings for when you attempt to sell an item which has an Incubator on it.

Return to top
Quest Rewards
Added Cobra Lash as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Nessa for the Ranger and Scion, for completing Enemy at the Gate. It replaces Frost Blades for the Shadow.
Added Stormblast Mine as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Nessa for the Witch, Templar and Scion, for completing Enemy at the Gate. It replaces Lightning Tendrils for the Shadow.
Added Swift Assembly Support as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Nessa for the Witch, Duelist, Ranger and Scion, for completing Mercy Mission.
Added Withering Step as a quest reward for the Shadow and Scion, and as purchasable from Nessa for the Ranger and Witch, for completing The Caged Brute. It replaces Wither for the Shadow.
Added Infernal Legion Support as a quest reward for the Witch, and as purchasable from Nessa for the Templar, for completing The Caged Brute.
Added Venom Gyre as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Nessa for the Ranger and Scion, for completing The Siren's Cadence.
Added Icicle Mine as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Nessa for the Witch, Templar and Scion, for completing The Siren's Cadence.
Added Summon Skitterbots as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Yeena for the Ranger, Witch and Scion, for completing Intruders in Black.
Added Blood Rage as a quest reward for the Duelist, Ranger and Shadow for completing Intruders in Black.
Added Death Mark Support as a quest reward for the Witch, and as purchasable from Yeena for the Templar and Scion, for completing Sharp and Cruel.
Added Nightblade Support as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Yeena for the Ranger and Scion, for completing Sharp and Cruel.
Added Plague Bearer as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Clarissa for the Ranger, Duelist and Scion, for completing Lost in Love.
Added Pestilent Strike as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Clarissa for the Ranger, Duelist and Scion, for completing Sever the Right Hand.
Added Pyroclast Mine as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Clarissa for the Witch, Templar and Scion, for completing Intruders in Black. It replaces Flameblast for the Shadow.
Added Feeding Frenzy Support and Meat Shield Support as a quest reward for the Witch and Templar, and as purchasable from Clarissa for the Scion, for completing A Fixture of Fate.
Added Impale Support as a quest reward for the Marauder for completing A Fixture of Fate.
Added High-Impact Mine Support as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Clarissa for the Witch and Scion, for completing A Fixture of Fate.
Added Charged Mines Support as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Clarissa for the Witch and Scion, for completing A Fixture of Fate.
Added Summon Carrion Golem as a quest reward for the Witch, Templar and Scion, and as purchasable from Petarus and Vanja for the Ranger and Shadow, for completing Breaking the Seal.
Added Minefield Support as a quest reward for the Shadow, and as purchasable from Petarus and Vanja for the Witch and Scion, for completing The Eternal Nightmare.

Return to top
PvP Changes
The formula for calculating damage in PvP has changed. It is now: ((Damage/(Time*90))^0.57)*90*Time for Physical and Chaos damage, and ((Damage/(Time*150))^0.55)*150*Time for Elemental damage. The net result of this change is that low damage hits will see virtually no change, while extremely high damage hits will see a reduction of about 30%.
Mine skills now use the Throwing time as the basis for PvP scaling.
Kinetic Blast now has a 30% damage penalty against players (from 50%).
Ball Lightning now has a 40% damage penalty against players (from 25%)
Unleash Support now causes supported skills do deal 40% less damage against players (previously no penalty).
Scorching Ray now has a Time override of 0.2 seconds (from 0.5).
Infernal Legion Support now has a Time override of 15 seconds for the burning damage it deals.
Minefield Support now causes supported skills to deal 50% less damage in PvP (from 15% less).
The Caustic Ground on Death effect from Siegebreaker now has a Time override of 5 seconds.

Return to top
Bug Fixes
Fixed a bug where projectiles would not appear to chain on the game client if the monster was slain by the hit.
Fixed a bug where destroying a wall in the Azurite Mine would count towards encounter completion for the sake of the Delve depth ladder.
Fixed a bug where Immortal Syndicate members could claim to have the job of "None" when you are selecting between actions.
Fixed a bug where some unique Strongboxes would override the Sextant modifier which caused Strongbox monsters to drop significantly more items.
Fixed a bug where Elemental Hit attacks which did not hit a target would still produce an explosion.
Fixed a bug where Daresso's combo attack was only dealing damage with the first swing.
Fixed a bug where Shield Crabs were only hitting with their double-claw attack once, rather than twice (two claws = double the danger (and double the flavour)).
Fixed a bug where animation cancelling could cause some skills to appear to fire in the wrong direction.
Fixed a bug where the unique body armour The Rat Cage could act incorrectly with other sources that converted incoming damage.
Fixed a bug where auras which affected nearby enemies would not update in time for skills which teleported you (such as Flicker Strike) to affect them.
Fixed a bug which allowed you to teleport into and out of the Mesa Map boss arena.
Fixed a bug which caused the incorrect Life values of summoned skeletons from gem levels 3 and up to show.
Fixed a bug where queued actions would misbehave if you held move-only during the first action.
Fixed a bug where the Illusionist body armour cosmetic would cause your shadow to vanish, as well as several bad visual interactions between it and other effects. These were not the illusions we sought.
Fixed a bug where the Celestial Winter Orb cosmetic effect didn't produce wind physics. Technically, there's no air in space, so was this really a bug? Yes. Yes it was.
Fixed a bug where you couldn't use the hotkey to close the Delve map if you weren't the owner of that instance.
Fixed a bug where the Monolith Aura effect would interact with wind physics.
Fixed a bug which caused the Sin Sword and Sin Longsword cosmetics to appear darker than intended.
Fixed a bug where the Wild and Wild Gold portal effects didn't play audio when using the Map Device.
Fixed a case of desync caused by the Divine Tempest.
Fixed bug where Ranged Attack Totem Support could support some skills it shouldn't be able to, because they created minions that used skills it could support.
Fixed a bug which caused Hillock to jump far slower than he was meant to.
Fixed a bug where we forgot to remove the Memory Nexus icon from the World Panel legend. Or maybe we were attacked by the Elder...?
Fixed a bunch of cases where the Monstrous Treasure prophecy would prevent fun mechanics from triggering.
Fixed a bug where you could support Berserk with Duration-modifying support gems, despite it having no duration that could be altered.
Fixed some awkward interactions between the Madcap Helmet and the Bleeding Eyes cosmetic effects.
Fixed a bug where you would fail to create a portal with Cast on Death if you were frozen at the point you died.
Fixed a bug where Scorching Ray totems wouldn't retarget after breaking out a Legion enemy.
Fixed a bug where Ancestral Call would leave weapon images behind when used with Flicker Strike.
Fixed a bug where a lore object in the Catacombs could become unreachable.
Fixed a Relic Chambers layout that could have unreachable areas.
Fixed some incorrect text regarding which craftable modifiers could be crafted on which slots.
Fixed a bug where the Dunes Map boss wasn't pulling the sword out of his chest like he was meant to.
Fixed some small cases of desync that could occur during the Elder encounter.
Fixed a bug where the Chieftain life recovery rate passive would trigger from non-enemy hits, when the passive specifically calls out enemies.
Fixed a bug where you could use a skill with a delayed slam (such as Ice Crash) and teleport mid-way through the attack, but the slam would stay in your original position.
Fixed several cases of mods that were craftable alongside mods they should not have been craftable alongside.
Fixed a bug where the incorrect tier would be displayed for mods on item types whose maximums for that type of mod were lower than other item types.
Fixed a bug where using a Vaal aura while you had Mortal Conviction or Supreme Ego (or both) would disable any other auras you had active.
Fixed a bug where certain tilesets would force Betrayal Transporation encounters to be far too short.
Fixed some skill gems missing the correct tags.

We really hope you enjoy Path of Exile: Blight. Thanks for your support!